
<!DOCTYPE html
  PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink">
   <head>
      <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" /> 
      <title>Basic chemistry terms for users of Brailchem software</title>              
   </head>
   <body>
      <dl>
         <dt></dt>
         <dd>
            <h1> Basic chemistry terms for users of Brailchem software</h1>
         </dd>
      </dl>
      <h2> Periodic table</h2>
      <dl>
         <dt> Symbol</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Symbol of element is derived from its latin name. It is used in written and oral communication, symbols are used to create
               molecular formulas and describe reactions. Symbol is the most important part of information about an element. 
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Atomic (proton) number</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Number of protons in atom nucleus. It is often designated by the symbol Z. Atomic number unambiguously determines the element
               and number of its electrons in uncharged state.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Column </dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Groups of elements designated by roman numbers I. – VIII. and letters A and B. There are 16 columns in the periodic table,
               divided to non-transition elements (I. – VIII. A) a transition  elements (I. – VIII. B). Elements of the same column have the same number of valence electrons (electrons available for reaction)
               and therefore similar chemical properties.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Row</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Rows of periodic table are more often referred to as periods. There are seven periods. Periods are ordered by increasing value
               of the proton number and therefore atomic weight – lightest elements in the first row, heaviest in the last.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Element group</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Assignment of elements into groups of metals, nonmetals, halogens, noble gases, alkali metals, alkali earth metals. This partitioning
               partially corresponds with columns of periodic table and again groups elements of similar properties.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Oxidation number</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Sum of positive and negative charges in an atom. Atoms in ground state have oxidation number of 0. Each element has a typical
               set of oxidation numbers; their knowledge help in determining reaction outcome.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Electron configuration</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Describes organization of electrons in electron shell. It is important in assessment of chemical properties of an element.</p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Atomic weight</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Relative weight of one atom of given element against standard (atomic weight constant –  1/12 of weight of one carbon atom,
               m<sub>u</sub> = 1,66057*10<sup>-27</sup> kg). It allows description of atomic weights in "reasonable" units from 1 to about 300. With rising proton number the atomic
               weight generally increases.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Electronegativity</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Ability of an atom to attract bonding electrons. This value is typical for each element and enables chemists to assess its behavior in specific types of reactions and also
               properties of its compounds.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Description</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>General information about an element, e.g. its color, reactivity, assignment between metals, nonmetals, semi-metals and gases. </p>
            <p> </p>
         </dd>
      </dl>
      <h2> Structure viewer</h2>
      <dl>
         <dt> ChemDraw binary format </dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Binary format used by the popular ChemDraw program and supported by several other programs for chemical drawing.</p>
         </dd>
         <dt> ChemDraw CDXML formát</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>XML version of the above described binary format.</p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Chemical Markup Language </dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Standardized XML format for description of molecules which is also often used in Internet sources.</p>
            <p>Linear format suitable for unambiguous "naming" of molecules in a computer readable form. Lately more and more often used
               in Internet sources.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Molfile</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Probably the most widely used standardized format for recording of molecular structure. Its is used by many databases as conversion
               format and is often available in Internet sources. 
            </p>
            <p>Linear format similar to classical notation for description of chemical molecules. It was devised to be both human readable
               and writable, e.g. CC=O (ethanal). This format makes it possible to create a description of a molecular structure without
               a need for a drawing program and is therefore especially suitable for use in written text and on the Internet.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Summary formula</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Describes types and numbers of atoms in a molecule of given compound. It is written down as a series of element symbols and
               their count. It does not allow description of the internal structure of a molecule, just its composition.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Protein Data Bank format</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Text format for description of biological macromolecules (proteins, nucleic acids).</p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Charge</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Difference between the number of electrons and protons in a molecule – when there are more electrons than protons, the charge
               is negative, otherwise it is positive.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Molecular weight</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Sum of atomic weights of all atoms in a molecule. </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Single bond</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Bond formed by one pair of electrons, written as a single line (-). Bond order is a very important factor in determining bonds
               reactivity and other properties.
            </p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Double bond </dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Formed by two electron pairs, written as two parallel lines (=).</p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Triple bond </dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Formed by three electron pairs, written as three parallel lines (≡).</p>
         </dd>
         <dt> Functional group</dt>
         <dd>
            <p>Atom or a group of atoms of specific structure that brings characteristic properties to the molecules, such as reactivity
               in some kinds of reactions. Determination of functional groups a inevitable for understanding of chemical properties of a
               molecule. 
            </p>
         </dd>
      </dl>
   </body>
</html>